TODO.md, before:

# Adding support for SQL features currently missing

## Outer joins

There is a hacky version of `LEFT OUTER JOIN` in
`Karamaan.Opaleye.LeftJoin`.  It doesn't use the AST but instead uses
a trick to embed the SQL directly.  It is not the correct long-term
solution but will do for now.  When a non-hacky version is implemented
the API will not need to change.  `FULL OUTER JOIN` can be implemented
exactly the same way.

A non-hacky version will be a lot of work.  It requires hacking both
HaskellDB's `PrimQuery` and `SqlSelect` to support them.  The Opaleye
side doesn't pose much of a problem.

It can be done by someone dedicated enough who's willing to spend the
time to get their hands dirty with the internals.

## `OFFSET`

This is not supported by HaskellDB but probably will be simple to add.
A new constructor to `SpecialOp` needs to be added, say `Offset Int`.
Then we do exactly the same as for LIMIT.

There's one potential obstacle: `limit m . offset n` may end up
generating invalid SQL because they're the "wrong way round".  I don't
think you can say

    SELECT ... FROM ... OFFSET n LIMIT m

in SQL.  Only `LIMIT m OFFSET n` is valid, as far as I know.  This may
end up confusing `defaultSqlSpecial`.  A potential way around this
would be to replace the `Top Int` constructor with `LimitOffset (Maybe
Int) (Maybe Int)` to ensure that `defaultSqlSpecial` can always deal
with both at once.

Anyway, that's an interesting problem for someone interested to work
on.

Commit message:

Update TODO.md about OFFSET

TODO.md, after:

# Adding support for SQL features currently missing

## Outer joins

There is a hacky version of `LEFT OUTER JOIN` in
`Karamaan.Opaleye.LeftJoin`.  It doesn't use the AST but instead uses
a trick to embed the SQL directly.  It is not the correct long-term
solution but will do for now.  When a non-hacky version is implemented
the API will not need to change.  `FULL OUTER JOIN` can be implemented
exactly the same way.

A non-hacky version will be a lot of work.  It requires hacking both
HaskellDB's `PrimQuery` and `SqlSelect` to support them.  The Opaleye
side doesn't pose much of a problem.

It can be done by someone dedicated enough who's willing to spend the
time to get their hands dirty with the internals.

## `OFFSET`

Erik Hesselink has [a branch for
OFFSET](https://github.com/hesselink/karamaan-opaleye/tree/implement-offset)
but it requires a patch to HaskellDB, so I am holding off merging for
a short while.

There's one uncertainty I have about the SQL that is
generated: `limit m . offset n` may end up generating invalid SQL
because they're the "wrong way round".  I don't think you can say

    SELECT ... FROM ... OFFSET n LIMIT m

in SQL.  Only `LIMIT m OFFSET n` is valid, as far as I know.  This may
end up confusing `defaultSqlSpecial`.  A potential way around this
would be to replace the `Top Int` constructor with `LimitOffset (Maybe
Int) (Maybe Int)` to ensure that `defaultSqlSpecial` can always deal
with both at once.

Anyway, that's an interesting problem for someone interested to work
on.
